Fall morning, October 29, Friday morning, and I'm
chatting with Mrs. Jack Kenny Williams, looking
out beyond her orchid area. Now, Mrs. Williams,
say a sentence or two, and let's test your mic.
Just anything. Good morning. I'm glad you're
here. It's a treat. Now, let's... See that
beautiful... Mrs. Williams, how did you and Dr.
Williams first meet? You were back in college?
Yeah, we were in college. He was a junior and I was a
freshman. And my mother had given my brother a
package of skirts that had been left behind to be
re-hemmed. I don't know whether they were
supposed to be shorter or longer. And after a
fraternity meeting, my brother asked Jack to
bring those skirts to me because we ate in the same
dining hall. And he told someone to tell him that my
skirts were behind the mirror in that foyer. And
when I walked in, he asked somebody who that was. We
didn't eat at the same table. And he decided he
would tell me himself. Now, this was at Emory &
Henry College? At Emory & Henry College in
Virginia. It's a Methodist school. About how many
students? How big was it? It wasn't large. I don't
remember at that time, and this is 38. Three
or four hundred students, probably. And how soon
was it before he asked you for a date?
I don't remember. He sort of hung around all the
meals, sent me a flower from his table, and he would
pull a marigold out of the vase or whatever it was
and bring it over, send it over by the waiter, but I
don't remember. It was a long time before he asked
me if he could kiss me. So y'all... That was months.
He asked me if I'd been vaccinated. That was a cute
little thing that some girl had said at a pep
meeting. They say kisses have germs, but you can
kiss me because I've been vaccinated. Did you ever
hear that? Did he have a sense of humor then as a
young man? I
don't know. I don't remember it registering with
me at the time. Because I think I always remember
his great sense of humor when I knew him. His sense
of humor was almost sarcasm. Have you noticed? No.
No, I wouldn't describe it as sarcasm, but... You
know, sarcastic, you know, in a way, things he'd
say was not... He was always kind, but funny. The
girls and I giggled at him all the time. How long
before you all became serious in your romance?
Weeks, months, years?
I don't know. I don't know how serious he was. He
dated so many girls along the line, and we dated a
lot, even the first year. I guess we were both
serious before summer came. Did, at Emory & Henry,
did people get, in the fraternity and sorority,
was there a special kind of pinning or anything
like that? Did you all do that? These were social
sorority clubs, they say. They were not national
at that time. You know, this is 38. This is
Depression years. But we had rush parties and that
type of thing, and he was already in the
fraternity. He was two years ahead of me. Jack went
to college at 16. I went to college at 18 because I'd
been living in West Virginia where they had one
more extra year, and Virginia had one less. And I
think he skipped, his mother taught him to read
before he ever started the school, and I think he
skipped a year, I'm not sure. Was he a history major
when you began? No, no, he was pre-law. He
majored in political science. And when he
graduated, his main professor had him a
scholarship or fellowship, scholarship it would
be, for Vanderbilt. In law? All right, but he
doesn't go to law school, does he? No, the war came
along, and money was scarier than his family, and
he said he had to get a job and earn his own money way
from then on because his father had two more
children to educate. And then the war came along,
and you know what happened. But he did teach two
years before, after he joined the Marine Corps in
December the 8th. He joined the Marine Corps, I
think that's in there. And it... Now that's
December 8th, 1941, the day after Pearl Harbor. He
was on the campus with me when it happened. And...
He joined the Marine Corps the next day. But they
had to wait until he could be placed in an officer's
school. So many joined, they had to just take them a
few at a time or whatever it was. Do you remember the
two of you talking about Pearl Harbor and what it
might mean to your lives? No. Because so many of us
are, you know, where were you when you heard the
news of Pearl Harbor? We were in the parlor of my
dormitory, and I had three or four sorority
sisters or friends in the room, and we had a radio
playing, and Jack was taking turns dancing with
them. And I was sitting on the sofa listening to it
all. So he liked to dance. His father had
dancing lessons. I was a preacher's daughter, and
it was sinful for preacher's children to dance at
that time, you know, and I had to just start dancing
without any lessons. But he was used to going to the
girls' schools and having a stag line. But I
brought that to an end. He only went to one more
after he met me. And he broke a date to do it. Now, did
you tell him not to go? No, I knew he was going. I
don't like this being recorded. Anyway, he said,
would I go to the first football game with him? And
when I told him when it was, either that day or
later, there was a dead silence.
And I knew that The day of the football game came, he
did not mention picking me up for the football
game, and I knew where he was. He was down enjoying
that stag line. He had had a date already to go down
there, and he didn't break it with whoever it was.
He broke it with me. It was never mentioned. By him
or me. Things just picked up and went right on. And
he didn't mention the fact that I told my friends
that I knew Jackson would break a date with me
tonight. Now, when did y'all get serious and when
were you thinking about getting married? And was
he already in the service?
No, no. My daddy brought that to a head. I was
invited to go visit a friend in Galax, Jackson
Town. She and I had met in church young people's
programs. And I was invited to go. He may have put
that together, but anyway, I wanted to go and I
asked about getting permission to go visit Jack,
although I was going to stay with this other
friend. And my father said, are you considering
marrying Jack? And I had never thought about it.
And I said, well, I guess so. And he said, then I
think you should go.
See what kind of father I had? That also seems like
your father was giving his approval. Oh, when Jack
came to visit, the two of them, Both of them loved
history, and they would spend hours talking and
discussing history. They were the best of
friends. Oh, that's marvelous. Now, when did you
all get married?
June the 10th, 1943. See, that's five years from
the time we met. But also just before he leaves for
active duty? In the Pacific. He left January the
10th. We got married in June, and he left, I think it
was January the 10th. And where did you spend those
months while he was gone? In Radford, Virginia,
with my parents, working for a Hercules powder
plant. In an office, of course, checking
inventory that was in the receiving department.
And how often did he write letters? Well, we both
wrote practically every day, but when he knew that
he was going into combat, he said, no, you won't
hear from me for a while. He told me later he didn't
want me to hear from a dead man, get a letter from a
dead man. And he went to the Pacific and made what
landings? Didn't he? What islands did they land
on?
I can't remember the name of the first one. I wanted
to say Roy Namor, but that wasn't. But the final one
where he was evacuated was Saipan. Saipan. And he
was wounded there, wasn't he? And where did he
recuperate? On Maui. Maui, back in Hawaii. And
Roosevelt came into his ward in a wheelchair. They
always say that Roosevelt did not anybody see him
in a wheelchair. He came in in a wheelchair and
visited them. Don't you think that's
interesting? Oh, yeah. Did Dr. Williams ever
comment about Roosevelt? What did he say about
him? Well, he just said he, you know, wrote that he
was there. But Jack was, at that time, was, I guess,
and, you know, I don't know.
He didn't go on a lot about his wounds, and it was
just shrapnel. His body had a whole lot of
shrapnel. I've told you this before about the
throbbing scar.
Go ahead. Go
ahead. He had a scar the size of a dime right over
his, I call it jugular vein. Jugular vein. Jugular
vein. that throbbed all the time. So on the left
side of his lower neck? I don't know. I don't
remember the side. But anyway, it was always so
interesting to me to think that this scar was there
over the vein and it throbbed. How did the scar get
there? What happened to the shrapnel that cut that
scar? Why didn't it cut the vein? It was chilling to
look at, to see this scar throb.
Why? There was shrapnel under the collarbone,
stuff that they never got out, of course, but why
did it not, he would have bled to death, of course,
immediately, carotid artery, is what I was trying
to say. Now, when did you first see him after the
war? Where? September.
September 45. Where was it? Roanoke, Virginia. I
was teaching school and I resigned because I
couldn't ask him to come and sit in there while I
continued. And so in March we left for Atlanta for
Emory University. March of 46. Yeah. Now why Emory
instead of some other school? He had a friend in
Charlie Harris from Georgia who was a graduate of
Emory and I think he influenced him to go to Emory
and I think it just had to have been Charlie Harris
and they were the very best of friends. We went to
his wedding, you know, after we moved to Atlanta
and Charlie got married and we went to Valdosta to
his wedding. And he later became a member of the
State Board of Education. And had Dr. Williams
decided that he was going to be A history major? No,
he was going into secondary education. His
teaching had taught him that there was a
discipline problem. And he came back and I said,
let's go to Harvard if you're going to be law. Let's
just go to the best school. And he said, no, I'm
going to go into secondary education. Men are
needed in education. And so anything he said was
just fine with me. You can imagine. After that
time, we were good friends. How long before he
decided that higher education was his goal? A
professor at Emory changed that. Who was it? I
don't remember. Was it Bellwine? It wasn't
Bellwine? No, no, no. Anyway, Jack was taking
history courses. And he said, this is awful to put
in print. You're wasting your time getting a
degree in education. No, that's not bad to have.
And if you will come over and major in history, we
will give you a scholarship. So this was a
historian marketing history. How did he, was he
enthusiastic about the history idea?
He didn't hesitate to make the change. Neither
of us ever went on about anything. He might tell me
that the little girl next door came over and played
at the house that day and he had a picture of her in a
wastebasket or something like that. And he
criticized one of the members in one of the
trailers there on the campus for showing some
broken crystal that he had brought back from the
war that he had absconded with and was so proud of.
And he was a ministerial student. Jack was
shocked. You know, we live so close to these people
that I got just a good... view of what people are
really like when you have people that we only had a
board sidewalk between us. Did you ever see that
place on Emory campus? No, you weren't born.
Between us and the next trailer. And these are all
veterans, I'll bet. Yeah. And while he was at
graduate school, what were you doing? I worked for
a dentist in downtown the WWR building. And I
commuted by bus and walked through the campus. And
he came home and cooked the evening meal because he
was on the campus to start with. And he got off at 4
and I got off at 5. So he decided to cook and that's
with life. How good a cook was he? He was terrible
until I told him to use cookbooks. I didn't say
anything until he admitted that something just
hadn't worked out. And I said, well, start using
the meat of givens, encyclopedias of cooking.
I've told you all this before. Let's see. Let me
take a break. See, I don't really like to make it
personal where I'm concerned. I don't mind
talking about Jack, but I don't want my life in
there. When I fell in love or anything like that, I
don't want that in this. I don't think it's
appropriate. You're back in the vet village.
The... I'm assuming that when the war is over,
almost all of those veterans were determined,
determined, determined to get their degree and
get on with their life. When you all went to Emory
and Dr. Williams decided to major in history, what
did you all think you were going to be doing Well, he
was going to teach from the very first. That was it.
He wasn't going to be a lawyer. Okay. And when he got
his master's degree, he said, I'm going to get my
job while there's still one. There's so many
people going to be looking for work. And so we
decided he would apply for a place. And I insisted
that it not be as big as Atlanta or small as Emory &
Henry. And so I was using the... dictionary
for a population and I thought Spartanburg South
Carolina sounded just great and the Wofford
College was there and the girls school was there
and he applied and he applied several other places
but a professor asked him to apply for Clemson so he
said there's a man there I want you to work for and
that was Miriam Kynard K-I-N-A-R-D. Did you all
come up for an interview? Did you come to visit
before he was gone? Jack did. I was working. Jack
did. And he went to Wofford, and both of them
offered him the same amount of money, Clemson and
Wofford. Really? $2,700 for nine months' work.
But Clemson had prefabricated houses that were
headed for England. for our military over there
and when the war ended they were left on the wharf in
South Carolina and Clemson got them. And that was
the deciding point for our coming to Clemson. So
you arrived in Clemson when?
1948? August of 1948. Describe Clemson College
then.
We didn't have an automobile.
Clemson was just a small college town, I guess
you'd say.
We had one of most everything, and it was still
military. The first year, there wasn't an office
for Jack. He was assigned to a table in the library
for his office. So he would come home and he would
tell the students, if you want to counsel with me, I
will meet you at this bench at our designated time.
And then he would come home. And the next year he had
an office and he shared it with a young man that
became his dear friend, Hugh McCauley. sharing
was by accident? I mean, the fact that it happened
to be Macaulay? It just happened as far as I'm
concerned. What has been the relationship of the
Macaulays and the Williams now for 50 years? Well,
we're family. We are a family. I feel by their
children like they feel like by mine, and we have,
we just did a huge He called me last night to say he
was sorry he couldn't be here today, and we joked.
He and I carry on a lot about money. For years, he
invested his own money, and for his mother, and for
his children, for his sister who was a widow. And
until he lost his eyesight, he did all this
himself, his own investing. And he was successful
with it. Let's back up. Bell Wiley. What was the
effect on Dr. Williams' career of having worked
for Bell Wiley? What did he think of Bell Wiley?
Well, they became good friends because he gave his
students a chapter to criticize, and Jack was the
only one that did. And so then he gave him the rest of
the book. And they just became friends. Jack
didn't require... See, I don't like to say this.
They said he didn't require any help from him. He
was self-perpetuated. He just did everything on
his own and didn't ask his professors to help. In
fact, he helped Bill Wiley, but Jack just... did
things and they said he was the most outstanding
student they ever had because he just didn't he
just came in and did his own work and didn't have
didn't have to be at Clemson he rose up through the
ranks and I know was very proud of his role in the
faculty senate and dean of faculties and so forth
at A&M I always wondered when my title became dean
of faculties why it was plural and not singular,
dean of the faculty. Then I happened to find an old
Clemson catalog, and I found that his title here
was dean of faculties, so I thought perhaps that's
why he suggested the same title there. At Clemson,
what do you think gave him the greatest pride of his
years here? What did he accomplish here that you
think he was most proud about? I don't know.
What did he enjoy most at Clemson? As I said, he
didn't come home and say, I enjoyed this today or I
didn't. I think he loved teaching. And the
students, it was obvious that the students
respected him. But he enjoyed his work for the
graduate school.
He didn't complain. He changed a lot of things. He
had a way of making a decision and seeing that it
happened. And when he came home, it was a happy
family bit. We didn't sit around and discuss the
university very often. I had ways of finding out
what happened, but it wasn't that he came home and
discussed what had gone on that day. What did he do
when you all were here at Clemson? What did he do to
relax? What was his diversion, his enjoyment
activities? Well, we played a lot of bridge. We
danced. He loved music. He read books. He built
those steps out there. Anything he saw that needed
to be done, always he did it, and he had a way of
relaxing. The Marine Corps taught him to relax.
When did you all build this house? 1960. It took us a
long time to get a down payment. We had two children
before that, two degrees before that. Do you
remember what the lot cost? Yeah. I have two lots.
$1,500 a piece. I bought the first two lots. I was on
the list. So when they opened this, got a straight
through, I was called. I was waiting on them. And I
was going to take the one next door. And it had a
ravine in it. I didn't like the ravine, so I took the
next two. And since then, I've heard one young man
who, I had a tree fall on me not long ago. And he used
to live, he was the coach's son, and we lived across
the street from him. And he had sold a lot. He still
has his parents' home. But he sold one lot for
$35,000, not far from here, and there's one on
Woodland Way that sold for $50,000. But I'm in the
middle of two. I can't sell one, and I don't want to.
And I presume that this lot was covered with trees
and you had to... Saw a few trees down to build a
house. They cleared it for us. It was wooded. I had a
lot of wildflowers at that time. Catherine, my
oldest daughter, and I used to walk down from our
apartment and pick wildflowers and take cookies
and have a picnic, we called it. While he was here,
while you all were here, Did Dr. Williams begin his
work then with the historically black schools
across the South? I know that he was very highly
respected for his work with some of the black
schools. Did that begin here while y'all were
here? Not that I know of. He worked with Southern
Association, you know that, but I don't remember
black schools being mentioned. We integrated
without any problem here because it was well
planned, and Harvey Gant was the right person to
bring in, obviously.
I heard Dr. Williams told me one day about some of
that, Describe Harvey Gant in personality as you
remember him as a student. Well, I didn't know him
as a student, of course. There's a lot in there
since I was teaching so much of the time and raising
two children and taking care of things that Jack
needed me to do.
Harvey Gant had a sense of humor, obviously. uh...
he uh... went into architecture and he would tease
the students and say if you make me do this i'll sit
by you in the cafeteria now i think that told you a
lot about Harvey Gant and why he has been a success
he hasn't gone around with a chip on his shoulder
since then you know he was the right person to
integrate Clemson College, and they had the right
attitude when he came. And there were no
incidents, were there, about him? Never heard of
one. Never heard of one. Now, were there women
already at Clemson when you all arrived? Was the
student body coeducational?
I don't know. I don't remember one way or the other
where they had some, I don't think so. I don't think
so. But it could have been that they already had
some women here. That
wasn't, you know, my thinking at that time, see,
when we moved in, with no automobile and I didn't
work the first year and the second year I went back
to work.
I guess I thought more about Bridge than I did what
was going on on the campus. At one time I played
Bridge with five different groups and then I quit
playing Bridge when I realized I couldn't go to
bridge parties in the afternoon and raise my
daughter, so I quit. When I came back here, old
friends called and wanted me to play bridge in
their clubs. I said, you know, I quit when I was
raising my children because I couldn't do that,
and I've never gone back. Jack and I had a computer.
We played bridge with a computer, and I still have
it.
Do you remember who contacted Dr. Williams about
the commissioner of higher education job in
Texas. Who? Yeah, I do.
President of University of Houston.
Wait a minute. I can't remember that name either.
We'll think of it in a minute. Yeah. They had worked
together in the Southern Association. Is that
where? He called Jack and said, Jack, I think you
ought to come. I guess Jack had been contacted or
had it mentioned to him before. They finally got
the salary up to where you could make it worth your
while.
He became commissioner. I mean, he took the
president of the Medical Center right after Jack.
You mean Mickey LeMaitre? That wasn't Mickey
LeMaitre. He was with MD Anderson.
Anyway, he quit because he thought it was boring,
and it would have been for him.
When you all
moved to Austin, what was your impression of
Austin as a place to live? Did you like it? Was it
pleasant?
Well, of course, I didn't think it was a good place
to raise children. because the children were
growing up too fast. They had too much. I had nice
contacts with people. But once again, Jack was
gone most of the time, and I was raising two
children. And I didn't get, in the two years, I
wasn't that much involved in,
you know, much that was going on because I've
always felt not...